at about the level of 15 candle power under which you would examine these documents and they had books that were open to one page and each day they'd turn a page they don't even turn the page every day which is even worse but as a matter of fact there's no point in having libraries if this is the way the books are to be made available to the people who are interested in them because that is to treat these as if they were pharaohs of Egypt and keep them in the dark so that they can last two or three thousand years
it's more important that those books be used usefully for a usable life, let's say, of five or six hundred years, and that we prepare a photocopy reproduction of them for use by people beyond five hundred years, than that they should, in effect, not be used at all until the end of time.
Of course, those are just the key treasures that they have.
I'm talking about those key treasures.
There's no point in having a key treasure when the creek treasure can't be enjoyed by anybody.
Might as well be a pharaoh stuffed in a box after being wrapped up tightly and kept in the dark inside of some huge architectural structure for a thousand years.
The whole purpose of collecting something is to disturb it.
To disturb it, to turn the pages, to feel it, to look at it, to examine it closely.
And if nobody can examine these things closely, I mean the treasures, then why have them?
See, that's just a perversion of the subject of saving.
Coming from Worcester, you know a perfect example of this in terms of an art gallery.
You had a marvelous collection in Worcester that was given on the donor's death to the New York Metropolitan Museum of Art.
where most of it will go into a cellar and will never be seen by the public again.
I think we ought to have a law in this country that any library or any museum that collects materials shall place those materials on public exhibit at least once every five years or put them up to market so that somebody else can buy them that will meet those conditions.
I didn't expect to get such great stuff right after that.
The special collections here at Boston University basically began when you arrived here.
No, they began before I arrived here.
I cannot take credit for Howard Gottlieb.
He is a wonderful presence at Boston University, but he arrived before I did.
It has been my privilege to support Howard Gottlieb to the fullest extent I could since my arrival, because I saw in Gottlieb the same kind of imagination that had driven Harry Ransom
And Gottlieb has this advantage over Harry Ransom.
He's been able to put together a major collection without the kind of financial support that Harry Ransom enjoyed.
Harry, once he decided to collect something, never had to worry about where the money was coming from.
He had so many wealthy associates and friends in Texas who would supply the money, or he could use state funds to supply the money.
Gottlieb has had to beg, borrow, and I don't think he's ever stolen.
but he had begged and borrowed in order to put together that collection.
But he's done more by persuasion than he has by compensation.
He actually has a special place in my book because he does demonstrate that you can do it without tremendous amounts of money.
And it's not to be equated just with the 20th century either.
That King collection, the Cecil King collection, and the Richards collection, I shouldn't say collection, there are three Richards collections,
Those are major collections for which the University of Texas would, I'm sure, have given millions that Godley got without a penny.
And that's not like collecting the gloves of a movie star or something like that.
Now, the movie collection is, in my opinion, trivialized when people talk just about the dancing shoes of Fred Astaire, for example, because what's much more important is that you have
you have the scenario or you have the text of a movie with an actress's comments in the margins, which gives you a clear indication of how that actor or actress began to interpret the work that they were performing.
Howard said that one thing, one mandate that he's always followed is follow the curriculum.
He won't just collect frivolous things that are wonderful,
But unless there's a course or a school or a department here, and I guess it relates to your thoughts on why we have special collections in universities.
I wonder if you have any thoughts on that.
Well, I think sometimes it's very difficult to anticipate what somebody's going to want to teach a course about.
I wouldn't collect works on astrology just because there was a course offered on it.
If there was a course, a series course offered on astrology as anything but a form of mental pathology or as a historical interlude,
by which the scientific method slowly emerged from mysticism and from mythology, I wouldn't want it at all.
I don't believe in giving a student college credit for taking mythology, I mean astrology, seriously.
To look at it as a human phenomenon is important, but to take it on its own terms is irresponsible, because the reputation of that pretender to knowledge
is more than adequate.
It's complete.
So I don't know how I might very well collect works on astrology as a way of gathering the data for somebody to make a study of that aberrant form of intellectual effort.
But I certainly wouldn't require that somebody be offering a course in it in order to do so.
You basically compete with a few institutions in 20th century, Texas,
I guess, California, UCLA, Illinois, I believe.
Of course, I guess the greatest collection of 20th century stuff is in Texas.
And one of my chapters is so suggested.
One of my chapters, quite frankly, is on the University of Texas.
I spent a week down there.
And I mean, if you're going to study institutional bibliomania, I guess you look at Texas.
Well, in Texas, you know, they have the greatest collection of forgeries in the world, I suppose, too, with those wise forgeries.
The Thomas J. Wise forgeries.
Yeah.
And the funny thing is, they turned out to be very valuable.
In their own right.
They're valuable as a demonstration of how to do it if you decide to do something dishonorable.
Yeah, they predate Harry Ransom like this.
Oh, yeah.
I guess what I'm... But Harry was so criticized for that.
I was there in the period in which
Harry was often criticized for the amount of effort, time, and money that he put into collecting those works.
But I was always a supporter of that because I remember that when I was a graduate student at Yale and a faculty member there, almost every day I went into the Sterling Memorial Library and began reading everything that was on display.
When I discovered James Weldon Johnson's autobiography of an ex-colored man,
It was by reading a yellow foolscap original manuscript of that work in that library.
And I started reading it there.
And then immediately went and got a copy of the work and read it all the way through.
I then read the letters of Jack London and Sinclair Lewis.
Here was London with worlds of experience and short of ideas for plots.
And here was young Sinclair Lewis loaded with ideas for plots and no experience to flesh them out.
And so they created a symbiotic relationship.
And London was paying Sinclair Lewis five dollars for every plot idea that he could use.
And he would get the idea and flesh it out with characters and locations and settings and motivations.
And Sinclair Lewis, who didn't have any of that experience at that stage, could generate plots at apparently a great rate.
As I began studying those documents, and it was adventitious because you never knew what was going to turn up next, I realized how valuable it was to be associated with a university that had that kind of library.
And when I came to Boston University, I looked around.
I couldn't find any cases like that anywhere.
And I remember one of the first things I said was that I saw no possibility of developing that kind of library at Boston University and those kinds of resources.
But for that reason, what I was going to do was recognize that Boston University would supplement the scholarly opportunity for faculty by buying membership in the Widener Library at Harvard for any faculty member who could make significant use of it, and also for graduate students.
And I said, that's a lot less expensive than trying to duplicate that library.
Is that still cold, by the way?
Well, no, no, because there's so many changes that have occurred since.
That still holds.
If somebody needs that, they can do it.
But the collection here is so much better now.
That's my Widener card.
Yeah.
We have well over, you know, we've reached a stage where we have a major library ourselves.
I was incorrect on that by a man who pointed out that Gottlieb was already doing things that were significant.
And I went to see Gottlieb and became acquainted with his collection.
At that time, he had some good colonial stuff on colonial military history and a few things.
And he had the 20th century collection that was just beginning to get started.
And then, but I realized how serious he was and how imaginative he was and how much he'd accomplished.
And he had a significant collection of, oh, what was his name?
Walt Whitman, Leaves of Grass and things like that.
And so...
I decided, you know, God leave is a horse to bet on.
And I've done everything I could since then to assist him.
Now, when he pulled in the Cecil King collection, at that point, his collection became a collection of major importance by anybody's standards.
And King, on the occasion that he brought it here, you know, with letters from Churchill and from all the press lords
You know about that Cecil King collection.
Such a brilliant collection.
There was a good deal of comment in the London press about how outraged they were that he was taking this collection out of England.
And so a reporter asked him, said, well, why did you bring it to Boston University?
And he said, well, there are two considerations.
He said, first of all, why did I take it out of England?
He said, remember that I'm an Irishman.
Good answer right after that.
And he said, and secondly, why it's brought to Boston University
because Boston University asked me.
He said, Howard Gottlieb had come to me to initiate this activity.
Can you contrast for me a question of style?
It just occurred to me now, but Howard Gottlieb and Harry Ransom, if you can.
Well, they're both literary types.
They're both people who have written and who write easily and well.
And they are people who also are highly articulate and can talk a great game.
They're both enthusiasts.
They believe in what they're doing.
And they're both extraordinarily imaginative.
I've thought about them being quite similar individuals.
although Harry was much more interested in other areas of education, such as teaching and curriculum building and things of that sort, and institutional building.
When it came to libraries, they're very similar.
And when it comes to the kind of appeal that they could make to an individual, they're remarkably similar.
When you talk to people in Texas or who know about Texas, they always come around to the unorthodox, not illegal,
but unorthodox methods employed by Texas to build this collection.
Well, what was unorthodox about it?
I mean, that money has value is not a Texas invention.
The fact that they decided to spend it is no different from when Morgan was putting together his library.
How the hell did he get it?
He just bought it.
And he bought it with the reckless abandon of a man who would say that if you have to ask what it costs to operate a yacht, you can't afford it.
And if somebody asked him, what did it cost to put together the Morgan Library, I suppose that J.P.
Morgan would have said, if you have to ask, you can't afford it.
He did it with money.
He didn't do it because he was the greatest living scholar.
As Lincoln Stephan said, if he'd left his pants off, if he'd left his pocketbook, when he said he left his pants off, he didn't mean he was naked.
He meant if he didn't have his billfold in his pocket, if he didn't have his money in his pocket, he would be indistinguishable from a butcher.
This is the way Morgan moved.
He moved with money.
Now, Texas moved with money.
It's no longer thought, I mean, the Morgan Library is no longer thought to be vulgar because it's an extraordinary collection, and thank God some rich man put it together.
And I'd say the same thing with regard to Harry Ransom.
I've heard him denigrated as vulgar, and I've heard the Texans denigrated as vulgar because they threw all this oil money around.
Well, that's spending oil money for some damn good purposes.
Now, some of the things that Harry did were severely criticized.
One time he came back from New York with a great crate, and somebody opened the crate and found nothing but dust jackets.
And they said, you paid $10,000 for this whole crate load of dust jackets?
And Harry said, if you would learn more about book collecting, you would find out that any first edition with a dust jacket on it has much greater value than a first edition without a dust jacket.
All he had to do was to fit about 100
of the maybe 25,000 dust jackets that were in that crate to their first editions in order to recover the $10,000 just by the enhanced value of the first edition.
He is described as, by the way, I agree with Warren Roberts in that New York Times piece that I wrote, that money is only money, and you have to get the stuff when you can.
And if anything, it's increased in value.
It hasn't depreciated.
Sure.
And so I, for one, have been through HRC, and I really am a great fan of what they've been.
That was a desert.
When I went to Texas, I couldn't find as much in the way of collections, except those damned forgeries, as I could find at Boston University when I came here in 1971.
Harry Ranson transformed that place.
When I came to Texas, I couldn't look through cases and see the interesting things I saw in the Sterling Memorial Library.
But when I left Texas in 1970, after having been there for 16 years, you could have just as wonderful experience in Harry Ransom's Humanities Research Center as you could in the Sterling Memorial Library, because the manuscripts were there.
Now, there was some ostentatious silliness, I suppose, when you recreate the study of a mystery writer, you know, board for board,
That's a little bizarre.
It didn't hurt anything, really.
I guess the question is, was the Gardner collection worth going to the trouble for all that?
You know, they did a lot of rooms down there.
That was one of the perks that they offered Alfred Knopf, who brought his wonderful library there.
Alfred Knopf's was well worth it.
I don't think there's any doubt about that, whether Earl Stanley Gardner's was worth it or not.
I don't know, but it's bizarre.
to the extent that you want to do something in a major way with murder mysteries, and with that genre for anybody, it was a way of anchoring a national center in that regard, and probably guaranteed the manuscripts of a very large number of mystery writers, either for nothing or for a very reasonable price.
Was Harry a man of vision, in your view?
Extraordinary vision.
Extraordinary vision and extraordinary
As I said many years ago about Harry Ransom, his strength was in his ignorance of the human modalities.
He didn't know the difference between what was necessary, what was possible, what was impossible.
And consequently, he would do things that reasonable people would have concluded were impossible and not worth trying to do because he just didn't understand those modal relationships.
And he was imaginative.
He liked an idea.
he would usually stick his neck out for it.
I remember the first major report I did as a faculty member for Harry Ransom.
I did it in collaboration with Roger Shattuck for the revision of the curriculum of Plan II.
And when we submitted this long document to Harry, he read it, and his comment was, this is a splendid report with an engaging touch of the totally impossible.
And this is the way it was.
The fact that it seemed to him
on the fringe of impossibility, didn't in any way repel him, because he thought, well, this is so wonderful, now how could we make it happen?
And then he would try to make it happen, and maybe he didn't achieve all of it, but he would achieve a great deal of it.
Another very frequent criticism of Harry Ransom was that he didn't keep his promises, that he was always breaking his promises, and there was a good deal of truth in it.
But the reason there was a great deal of truth in it is that Harry would promise anything to damn near anybody.
Harry was a man who had difficulty in saying no to any idea that had any merit whatsoever.
And consequently, he would promise more than he could deliver.
But the good news was that Harry delivered about 60% of the time.
And that meant that 40% of the time, he didn't deliver.
But he promised maybe 1,000 times more
than an ordinary person would have.
So out of the 60% of the time that people got what they wanted, probably not more than one-third of them would have got what they wanted from anybody else.
Warren Robertson, I don't think I used that quote, this quote in that piece, he described it, and I must say affectionately, as a con man.
He said he was able to get anything he wanted from the Board of Regents.
Would you agree with that?
Well, he could get a lot from them, not because he was a con man, but because he was extraordinary.
He said the man could talk the pants off, you know, whatever the expression might be.
Well, you see, it's very similar to a remark that was made to me by Abe Sacher, Abraham Sacher, the founding president of Brandeis University.
He said, for the first 10 years of my presidency, I did not know whether I was the highly successful president
of the first university sponsored by the Jewish community or whether I was the most flagrant con man to come down the pike because I was promising and committing to this, that, and the other without any way of knowing whether I'd be able to deliver on what I was promising.
Now, I think that's inevitable.
I think that goes with the territory.
That goes with the territory of every builder, every innovator.
You know, I've talked to the trustees about making Boston University excellent without being able to demonstrate its possibility.
I just had a conviction.
And it takes the conviction and working on the conviction to turn what's a possibility and a very dubious possibility into a reality.
And that's what Harry did.
What distinguishes Harry Ransom from a con man is there was nothing personal in it for him.
That's the same thing is true of Abe Tacker.
That's very important, by the way.
Fundamental.
In fact, I will disprove in my book a very scurrilous allegation made by Charles Hamilton in New York that Harry and Lou Feldman, the book dealer, made millions of dollars buying and selling books.
There's just absolutely no foundation for that allegation.
I even found out where he got that information.
He got it from a former maid of Lou Feldman's.
But anyway, I will disprove that assertion in my book.
But that's a very important point to make.
If Harry Ransom did make millions, nobody ever found him spending it.
And his wife didn't become rich on his death.
So what the hell happened to it?
I just want to make the point that I will be disproving that.
scandal, a libelous allegation.
When did that libelous allegation first come?
It's appeared in one instance in a book published by Charles Hamilton about ten years ago in a book called The Auctioneers, published by— That's after Harry was dead?
Oh, yeah.
Well, I've interviewed Hamilton on this, and I asked him where he got his information, and he told me, and he wouldn't name the person.
I found out who the person is.
But he hated Ransom, and he hated Feldman.
This Hamilton is the guy who's, you know, who he is.
He's in New York.
He writes the books about forgeries, and he's the expert on autographs.
But I can get a copy of it.
In fact, they gave me a copy of the thing down in Texas, and I just disproved it point for point.
This is not a big deal.
I just want to make the point that Harry, from everything I've been able to learn, did not profit personally from what he did in Texas.
A lot of people have alleged that.
And neither has Gottlieb.
I wouldn't even mention that in the same context.
That's never even been hinted that Howard has.
I guess... But I think that's required of a con man.
I mean, all of us stick our necks out on behalf of good causes and make promises and commitments on behalf of good causes without any assurance that all those promises can be fulfilled.
That's inevitable for any builder.
It's been suggested that you came into Texas as one of Harry's protégés.
That's right.
Absolutely true.
I was one of Harry's boys.
That's the way they referred to us, Harry's boys.
William R. Smith, Roger Shattuck, myself, a few others.
And there's also been speculation about why you left in 1970.
And I want me to tell you what I hear, and maybe you can disprove it for me.
And this is very simplistic, but it's what people say.
Dr. Silber...
wanted to build faculty.
Mr. Irwin wanted to build buildings.
Conflict.
Harry Ransom, in the meantime, was devoted to you, respected you, but at the same time, he had this vision, he had this obsession to build HRC, and he was forced to make a choice.
It didn't have anything to do with the HRC, but he had to make the choice.
But is there truth to any of that?
Sure.
There's a lot of truth to that, but it's more specific than that.
I also, in trying to pursue the interest of building the faculty, was presided over a meeting of the faculty of the College of Arts and Sciences, which was the largest faculty by far at the University of Texas, and we had more than 50% of all the students at the University of Texas, and that faculty voted that the size of the university should not exceed 35,000, that also in earlier years, before I was dean, voted it should not exceed 30,000, and earlier than that, that it should not exceed 25,000.
And it shouldn't have.
About 25,000 is where they should have stopped because there began to be a breakdown in educational quality and in the contact beyond departments, between departments and between colleges, between the law school and the College of Arts and Sciences and so forth.
And so I presided over a meeting which the faculty voted virtually unanimously that the university should not grow beyond 35,000.
Frank Irwin called me into a meeting with the president.
It was also at a time where I had wanted to create a residential college at the University of Texas by taking four dormitories that were built in a quadrangle and turning them into a residential college along the Yale model.
And the president had turned me down on that, said we didn't have the money.
So I went to Gib Denman in San Antonio and got the money from him to do it through a foundation that Gib Denman was running.
I came back to the president, said that here I had the money, would like to start this residential college.
Well, I got the call from Irwin, came to a meeting.
Norman Hackerman was there.
Irwin was there.
And he says, I understand that there's a conflict between you and the president that I have to resolve.
I said, what's that?
He said, well, I understand that you intend to build a residential college and the president has vetoed it.
And that you've gone ahead and raised the money and intend to do it.
I said, no, that's not my understanding.
My understanding is that the president told me that he liked the idea, but that he didn't have the money.
And I went out and got the money, and I presume the president likes the idea.
And he said, well, that's not my understanding, and Hackerman is sitting right there not saying a goddamn thing.
And I said, now, if I'm misinformed on that, and if the president is opposed to this idea, and he doesn't want the residential college, then I will return the money.
But I said, there is no conflict between the president and me on this issue.
I wasn't about to get myself fired over an issue like that.
Is this about 69?
This was about, yeah, about the fall of 69.
I got fired in the summer of 70, but it'd be the fall of 69, about September of 69, or October, somewhere along there.
He said, I also understand that you've...
You've been presiding over a meeting of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences in which you voted that the university shouldn't increase beyond 35,000.
He said, when that happens, I think it's time to fire the dean and break up the college.
And I said, I think it's time to recognize the conflict of interest that you have with the interests of this university.
I said, the quality of instruction and education in this university is beginning to deteriorate because it's getting too large in order to have the kind of
interplay between faculty and colleges and departments that is necessary for a first-rate education.
And because we continue to expand, we dilute the influence of our endowment, and we continually are expending our substance on buildings, more buildings, more buildings, and the quality of instruction is going down.
And I said that is not the way to build a university of the first class, and the Constitution of the state of Texas calls for a university of the first class.
And that's not fulfilling the obligation.
But you and your associates on the Board of Trustees are buying land all around this campus and building high-rise condominiums and dormitories on it.
And obviously, if you continue to expand the university, you can make millions on that because you can guarantee the occupancy in all those structures.
And I said, don't you see that as a serious conflict of interest?
And he looked at me over these half-glasses and he says, and by the way, and Irwin liked me personally, and I liked him personally, so it was not personal at all.
We never had a crossword on any personal issue at all.
He shook his head and he said, John, you'll never learn.
Where there is no conflict, there is no interest.
Now, that line belongs in Bartlett.
Yeah.
It's wonderful.
And so I knew from that point on that he was going to fire me.
And I zigged and zagged and zigged and zagged.
And he zapped me about the 24th of July of 1970.
Now, where was Harry in all this?
Did Harry kind of— Harry lay low.
And Harry was at the meeting of the regents after I was fired.
I attended the meeting of the Board of Regents, and I'd been fired.
But I got on the agenda of it because they also put on the agenda breaking up the College of Arts and Sciences.
And I was advised by faculty that petitions were signed by faculty and by 7,000 students in the middle of the summer, opposing my being fired.
But I was offered a resignation, but I didn't choose to resign.
I insisted that if they remove me, they'd have to fire me to do it.
But I went down there and I said, look, I'm not arguing with your decision to terminate me as dean.
I said, I accept that.
But having accepted this, since the only reason for breaking up the college was to get rid of me as dean, you don't have to break up the college because I'm gone.
Now, if you break up the College of Arts and Sciences,
You will separate the humanities, the social sciences, and the physical sciences.
And that is a way to undermine the strength of all these branches.
The humanities need the sciences and the social sciences.
The social sciences need both.
And the physical sciences definitely need the access to the humanities.
And I said that is not the way to improve this university.
It's a way to reduce the quality of instruction here to that of a technologically-oriented institution instead of a world-class university.
I'm gone.
I'm not going to argue that decision.
But I want to fight for the decision to leave the college intact.
What happened?
They voted to break up the college.
And Harry Ransom, and I mentioned my conflict with Irwin, and Irwin turned beet red, just turned beet red.
He was embarrassed by it.
And I said, you don't have to pursue this conflict.
Harry held his head in his hands.
He said nothing.
When the meeting was over, Harry came up to me to say how sorry he was.
And I said, he had tears in his eyes.
I said, I understand, Harry.
I said, you've just been put through the last act of Titus Andronicus.
You just proceeded in hand.
I said, you had your child served up for dinner.
How much time have we got, Doctor?
Fifteen minutes?
No, well, maybe five.
Okay.
But that's the way it ended.
Do you think Harry could have saved you?
Yeah.
Do you think there's any credence to the suggestion that maybe he made the devil's deal with Frank Irwin, that Frank said, I won't fool around with your acquisitions?
No, I think it was something more serious than that.
And what might that have been?
I'm not going to speculate on it.
But I think that Harry, in some sense, was vulnerable and in a way that Frank Irving was aware of.
And that's what stayed his hand.
I think he just about killed Harry.
But you definitely think that he, without suggesting what it might have been,
You think that he probably presented something to Harry and said, stay out of this?
Yeah.
I think that he made it clear to Harry that if he tried to defend me, he was gone.
Harry was gone?
Harry was gone.
Wow.
And that he had the means to do it.
And this is just something intuitive in your part, or you base it on something that you... No, I base it on something.
Do you think it's worth my pursuing in other areas, or would I be best advised to leave it alone?
Is it something I'm likely to find?
I could say that off the record.
I'm just curious.
I don't know.
I think it'll be hard for you to find.
That's probably not even worth getting, right?
Because I'm writing a book about book collections.
I'll shut the thing off.
I mean, we're basically done.
I know Harry Ransom very well, and I know Frank Irwin very well.
And I know that Frank Irwin always looked for people's weaknesses so that he could exploit them.
And when I became dean, I immediately sold a property interest I had in a high-rise dormitory, the Dovey House at the University of Texas, because the developer of that project had invited me to be an investor and wanted me to assume the responsibility of turning that high-rise dormitory into a residential college and to offer academic programs and to have
and to select faculty fellows to be associated with it who would eat their meals at the Dobie House and provide education.
When I became dean, I immediately sold my interest, instantly, because I intended, now I was in a position to create such residential colleges on the part of the university.
Before, I had tried without success, and so I was quite happy to do it with a private investor.
Now, as dean, I had the opportunity to do it with university facilities,
And I said it would be a conflict of interest and I must divest.
So I did.
It shocked President Hackerman when I informed him that I had divested.
He said, why did you do that for?
And I said, so it would not be a string attached.
I think that when Frank Irwin found out that I had divested in that, that was a bad mark against me as far as he was concerned.
Because it meant that silver is squeaky clean.
Let's conclude with two fast questions.
You gave me a characterization of Harry Ransom.
Give me a characterization of Frank Irwin.
Frank Irwin was a very intelligent, very ambitious man with a very limited education who knew almost nothing about what was required to have a great university.
But he was very, very smart, and he was politically astute.
And his idea for a university was an enormous structure, apparently.
Well, yeah, and a great football team, and a great basketball team, and a great baseball team, and a great baseball park, and a great football stadium, and a great basketball stadium, which they appropriately named in memory of Frank Irwin.
And if Harry wanted a Bibliothèque Nationale on the campus of Austin, that was all right, too.
Sure, that was all right.
That was all right.
He liked that, too.
And do you...
Are you pleased at the way things have turned out with your life?
I mean, you left Texas?
Well, if I had known that I would not remain in Texas, and could not have one day been the president of the University of Texas to achieve the destiny of that school, which should by this time be well recognized as the greatest university in the world.
It had no excuses.
It had the money.
It just didn't have the direction.
And the direction
that it did have that was given it by first Logan Wilson and then especially by Harry Ransom was muted in the last years of Harry Ransom's chancellorship by Frank Irwin and then terminated when Frank Irwin proceeded to get rid of Norman Hackerman and get rid of me.
People may deny that he got rid of Norman Hackerman, but that's just their ignorance.
He sold Norman Hackerman to Rice University
And this is no criticism of Norman Hackleman.
He was a fine man and a very able scientist, and he made a great president of Rice.
But it wasn't his idea of going to Rice.
He had the choice of being canned at the University of Texas or going to Rice, and his appointment at Rice was arranged by Frank Irwin.
Did you expect that you would be the president of the University of Texas?
Sure, I did.
And the intention was to make it not one of the finest.
The finest.
And you have no doubts that that would have happened?
I think it was very likely to have happened.
Certainly, it would be recognized right now as if any place was better, it would have been Harvard.
Maybe Harvard.
MIT in certain areas would be as good as the University of Texas, but not substantially better.
And there would be areas in which the University of Texas would be flourishing, and MIT and Harvard would scarcely exist.
It's a good one to quit on.
You're very happy with it.
You've done wonders here, however.
Yeah, but we start so much later.
When I came to Boston University, it reminded me very much of the way Texas was about 1948.
That was in 1970.
And I remember when I thought that Boston University was about to reach the quality that Texas was in 1955 when I came.
And then it was...
Boston University is now approaching the standards that Texas had reached when I left.
I think the English department here is vastly superior to the English department of Texas then or now.
The philosophy department is not yet as good as the philosophy department I left at the University of Texas but it's getting there and I think within two or three years it'll be there.
The physics department here is much smaller than the Texas department but in the areas in which we exist we are
Top flight, absolutely top flight.
Of course, they have state money, and you don't.
And that makes it tough.
Chemistry is by no means as good here as it was there.
Biology is not as good as it was there.
But in history, I think we're at least as good.
And in mathematics, I think we're better.
In computer science, I think we compare very favorably.
We're not as strong in the foreign languages.
We're stronger, of course, in religion and theology, which you have none.
I think our medical program does very well, and our dental program, these are comparable, different size, but comparable in the area of music.
I think we're stronger in theater.
I think we're at least as strong as Texas was.
One other question.
It was also suggested that Erwin was fearful that you were building a political base around yourself.
I don't think there's any doubt about it.
I think that he told Rabbi Olin, a Dallas rabbi, that he was going to fire me in September of 1970, the evening that I attended a fundraiser that was organized by the Arts and Sciences Foundation.
by Annette Strauss.
Annette Strauss was a sister-in-law of Robert Strauss, by the way.
And she was a member of my Arts and Sciences Council and brought together an audience of some of the richest people in Texas.
That audience was probably at a net worth of maybe $3 billion back in 1970.
And, I mean, 1969.
I went ahead and they headed to Turtle Creek Country Club.
And I spoke to it.
Harriet Hackman attended.
And what do you know?
Frank Irwin, unannounced, appeared along with Ben Barnes, the Attorney General.
I mean, the Lieutenant Governor.
And Ben Barnes said to me, this is the heaviest group of people ever assembled on behalf of the University of Texas.
Ackerman introduced me that night with no great generosity.
Silver does lots of things that I like.
He does lots of things that I don't like, but he certainly is, you know, somebody to
to hear from, and I got up and made, without notes, a speech that most people there perceived as not only delightful, but brilliant, and informative, and totally supportive of Hackerman and the university.
And I got a standing ovation out of those, and at that point, Harry Ransom turns to Rabbi Olin and says, I'm going to fire that son of a bitch.
Harry Ransom said?
No, I'm sorry.
Frank Irwin.
She said Harry Ransom.
I'm sorry, no.
Frank Irwin said, I'm going to fire him.
And Rabbi Olin caught an airplane the following Monday to Austin to tell me about that conversation because he was that worried about it.
Now, Frank Herwin didn't care at all that I was liberal.
That didn't bother him in the least, that I had supported integration of the University of Texas, that I had supported the rights of black students, that I had supported the rights of Hispanic students, that I was working out scholarship funds to benefit those kids.
that I was working with the black schools in Austin, Texas, and helping with the integration of the university and of schools, that I was the first president of the Texas Society to abolish capital punishment.
None of that bothered him at all, except it was something he could use.
Now, always to be sure that I didn't go anywhere.
And he used it when he decided to fire me.
He tried to let the word out that I was this communist that they had to worry about.
But as a matter of fact, what really triggered his action was that I was gaining support from a very well-to-do center in Texas politics.
And it meant that if I continued there, I'd no longer be controllable.
I don't think there's any question about that.
Did you have political aspirations in Texas?
I thought about politics and political office in Texas, but I had not discussed it with anybody.
And that's one of the reasons why I have a lot of respect for Frank Irwin.
He figured out what my long-range intentions were without ever asking me or without ever discussing it with me or without my ever having discussed it with anybody.
That's why, you know, I have a good deal of respect for somebody who can...
read somebody else as clearly as he read me.
But what he overlooked was the fact that I was doing the state a lot of good and the university a lot of good.
In the meantime, he didn't help the situation at all by getting rid of me.
But he's a guy like Lyndon Johnson.
He trusted no one that he couldn't control.
And he didn't want anybody around that he couldn't control.
And if Harry Ransom had not been controllable, Harry wouldn't have been around.
And one of the reasons why I wanted to get rid of Norm Hackerman is that Norm Hackerman was a marvelously honest and independent man.
And not easy to control, because there were no flies on Norm Hackerman.
Unrelated to Texas.
You going to give it another shot up here?
Oh, no, Mike.